Welcome to the Kipuka! 
I am glad you are here and want to play by the rules.
                        We have put a lot of time into organizing our rules to make viewing pleasurable on a variety of
                        devices and still look good on paper. Before we dive in, let's go over navigating the rules.
                        Click the down arrow to continue reading this section.
                        
Please Note: Kipukas uses many small game pieces to keep track of play. All pieces should be
                        treated as CHOKING HAZARDS and the game content is for people 14+ years of age.
                        Do not let children under or pets play with the pieces.
                        At all times, it is the responsibility of the legal guardians to keep all pieces out
                        of reach of children and pets.
                        
                        By continuing to play with our products, you acknowledge that Kipukas accepts no
                        liability for damages incurred by the misuse of our products.
                     
                            Make Me Printable!  Tip: Convert to PDF & select multi-page layout to reduce paper usage.
                            (Each page has only a bite of information to make it digestable, but this eats a lot of paper.)
                         You made it! 
                        When you are ready you can click the right arrow to advance to the first part of the rules.
                        We would like to show you one quick thing first, so kindly click down again.
                     When you see our logo you can click it to take you to the binder homepage. Also when you click the book icon, it will take you back the table of contents for the rules. Now click right to proceed to the next section. Table of Contents Game Forward You may skip if you prefer 
                        Kipukas is a game which draws the best concepts from creature card games
                        and melds them with land conquering play. While I have personally enjoyed
                        playing in other competitive card based games, I grew frustrated with
                        becoming attached to certain characters, styles, and strategies only to have
                        them become re-released, competitively invalidated by the latest deck release, or
                        banned due to corporate oversight. On top of this, game companies tend to
                        produce very poor quality cards which are not meant to last, yet some manage
                        to reach unfathomable prices not worthy of the underlying paper. Kipukas
                        seeks to be different. I want Kipukas, both as a game and a durable good, to
                        outlast myself. By making cards which are updatable without new releases, we
                        keep all the cards we produce competitively relevant. Additionally, with most
                        cards produced at low rates, Kipukas challengers are much more
                        diverse. The durability of our cards as game pieces are protected by the fact
                        that we can update a broken card mechanic POST SALE. This protects your value
                        from being wasted due to our short sightedness or oversight. While most land conquering games are enjoyable as well as
                        strategically challenging, I was dissatisfied with the amount of pure luck the
                        games hinge on. By combining with the complex card v. card mechanics,
                        Kipukas battles feel more engaging, all the while retaining the larger scale
                        strategies of the land conquering play. While complex and entertaining play is
                        great, I want Kipukas to take on deep meaning and help spread it to many
                        wonderful people in this world. Kipukas will set industry standards for
                        innovative play, company interaction, and support of all whom make Kipukas awesome.
                        Lastly, I hope many find Kipukas as enjoyable as I have found my competition. Better yet, more so.
                     Background May also be skipped 
                        Kipukas is a visualization of a world where society creates new worlds as they
                        see fit. Each of these worlds are known as kipuka, which comes from the
                        Hawaiian word for 'land between lava flows', and is symbolic of the destruction
                        and rebirth of worlds. Cloning and genetic manipulation are the preferred
                        methods of populating, expanding, and manipulating the worlds. In the game,
                        the kipukas are represented by the 3D game map and the souls take life in the
                        cards. The game represents the strife to control the world, while the players
                        provide the motivation for the strife. The companion book series, Conscious
                        Territory, which takes a deep dive into these concepts, is in progress with the
                        first three chapters released and ready for reading. I have personally enjoyed
                        working the concepts and hope you will enjoy contemplating them as well.
                     Objective: Conquer Winning the game 
                    Get off to a good start and establish base camps across the board. Win fights
                    and think strategically to take your frenemies base camps and if you dare their
                    capital! Once one player claims all base camps and capitals, they dominate the
                    kipuka and win the game.
                 Required Game Pieces Let's go over the pieces for a 2 player game These are ALMOST all provided in the starter kit for 2 players Capital: The hardest area to take Base Camp: The standard base of operations Soul Token: Reveals a soul's position on the map D6: A die with 6 faces Diel Die Controls the day, night and storm cycle D20: A die with more faces! Familiarizing Game Play Concepts Our Conventions, Courtesy, and Quarks Pieces 
                        Kipukas relies on oversized cards, 3d printed game pieces and game boards, and a mat for play
                        organization. We currently make all of these as a batch process in-house. The cards we produce do not include the play mechanics on the
                        card as, to my knowledge, all other card companies do. Instead, we let the artist’s
                        work be as big and beautiful as possible. In fact, we do not even let the name of the
                        card get in the way of showcasing artistic talent. Instead, we have made the play data
                        for every card we produce accessible from the QR code printed on each card's back. Technically,
                        this means the back of every kipukas card is wholy unique and identifible. However, unless you
                        can scan a QR code with your eye it probally won’t help you much. Additionally, the card art on the back
                        helps camouflage the QR from cameras at a distance making remote cheating quite difficult to say the least.
                     Example Card (above) Front and back of a the Kipukas card ”Hilbert: King of Avian Frogs”. Creating a card boarder was the artist's choice. QR Codes 
                        In order to make this process as user-friendly as possible, we have included a private
                        QR scanner which runs locally on your device through our web app. We, nor any other interested party, 
                        will be able to see footage caught on the QR scanner because it is never stored and never touches the internet.
                        The same cannot be said about that random QR app you installed on your phone... If you prefer to install an app we recommend the open source
                        Android app called Binary Eye as is uses the same code library as we do and is tested to work as well with some default settings changed. Cognex bar code scanner
                        is OK for iphones. From now on we will assume that you trust us and use the QR scanner on kipukas.cards. Here, click the QR button
                        in the tool bar, accept the privacy statement, then a camera will pop up. Give the beautiful face
                        presented a gracious smile and show a card to the scanner. It will take you to that cards play data
                        page. If for some reason you need to cancel scanning, you can click the eye icon on the top left of the scanner to close it.
                        This scanner only works for QR codes which pattern match against Kipukas playing cards.
                        The scanner will work best during a game if your device does not sleep during the play through.
                        It is optional, but recommended to use or install a caffine mode app for this purpose. I hope you don't mind terrible selfies, because
                        on the following page I screenshot one to show how this works. BTW I am holding the card way too far away on purpose
                        for the shot. The QR code should take up most of the camera frame.
                     QR Codes cont. The QR scanner on hilbert's kipukas.cards page running on a 1080p laptop. If you are curious, I am scanning "Shard's Desert"; the first card commissioned for Kipukas. 
                        A last note about the cards. The center of the edge on the cards is colored to reflect
                        their archetypal adaptation. This is a unique feature that allows players to see what
                        type of card is on its way. Take advantage!
                     
                        The following image shows an example of our game board, a.k.a. the map or kipuka.
                        For your convenience, it is labeled with token placement and boundary line nomenclature.
                     
                        Note the numbers on each territory stand. This is the reference for that territory.
                        The following is an example of a mat that would be paired with the above map.
                     
                        The slot numbers reference the territory numbers on the board. When cards are
                        played, they are played on these slots. Once a soul token moves between territories,
                        their corresponding card is moved from the old territory slot to the new territory slot on the
                        mat.
                     Game Terminology 

Day, night and storm characterize a turn in Kipukas. You can take as many actions as possible during these phases, but this consists of only one turn.
Characters and Species are collectively called souls. While they have subtle play differences, when the term soul is used they play in the same manner for that context.
When a player has initiative on the turn, they take the first action (1 card played or 1 soul moved). The player without initiative takes the next action on the turn.
Kipuka (singular) refers to the 3D terrain that the game is carried out over.

 Day, night and storm characterize a turn in Kipukas. You can take as many actions as possible during these phases, but this consists of only one turn. Characters and Species are collectively called souls. While they have subtle play differences, when the term soul is used they play in the same manner for that context. When a player has initiative on the turn, they take the first action (1 card played or 1 soul moved). The player without initiative takes the next action on the turn. Kipuka (singular) refers to the 3D terrain that the game is carried out over. Game Setup 
                            Place the 3D map on the outlined square printed on the mat. Gather and place the required
                            game pieces
                            next to both players.
                         
                            Unlock your device, turn on caffeine mode, then visit kipukas.cards (ideally on
                            a chormium based browser). Also, it is best if your device has a fully functioning front facing "Selfie" Camera
                         
                            Each player declares an affinity for one archetypal adaptation for use over the duration of the game.
                            Say “The blank are my crux.” where blank is an archetypal adaptation. For example, “The
                            brutal are my crux.” SeeAffinity. (For a list of archetypal
                            adaptations, see Character and Species (Soul) Cards: archetypal adaptations)
                         
                            To determine who places first, see if any player would prefer to place first allowing their
                            competition initiative for the first turn. If either everyone or no one wants to place first, both players roll a D6. The
                            higher roll places first while the lower roll takes initiative for the first in-game day.
                         
                            One player takes the first territory by placing their capital, the other
                            player then takes a territory with their capital. After this, each player
                            makes claims with base camps until both players have 3 territories. This
                            will leave 2 to 6 territories unclaimed, depending on the map in use.
                         
                            Place the personal effect card that you will be using in front of you. You
                            are not obligated to reveal what it does until you use it. If you do not
                            have a personal effect card, use the default effect. See Personal Effects
                            Note: Starter Decks do not include personal effect cards
                         
                            Respectfully shuffle each other’s decks, then hand the deck back to its
                            owner. DON’T BRIDGE THE CARDS! Slide the cards along one
                            another, lifting then placing small groups to change the card order.
                            Remember that these cards are fine art and should be respected as such!
                         
                            Draw three cards from the top of the deck
                            

NOTE: This is your absolute max hand size. You cannot have
                                more than three cards in your hand at any given time. Also, you
                                cannot play more than 3 cards from your hand within a diel roll
                            
 
                            Begin the game on the turn of the player who placed their capital
                            second. The first diel cycle is always day, followed by night, followed by day. In this way,
                            both players get the chance to play cards, refresh their hand and move once
                            before diel cycle rolling starts.
                         Diel Cycle and Turn Advancement 
                        If you followed along up to this point, you should now be ready to play the
                        game! Let’s go! The first 3 turns are predetermined to always be day, then night, then day to jump start the game.
                        After these, the first thing the players need to do before every turn is roll the diel die. It has faces
                        that show a sun (day), a moon (night), and lighting/wind (storm). This roll
                        dictates the actions you can take over the course of this turn, as is detailed further in this section.
                        If present, the numbers indicate the order actions are taken. 
                        While it may seem counter intuitive for night not to follow day, don't think of the diel cycle die a
                        being directly attached to hours of a day. Rather think of the roll as dictating the productivity of
                        that day.
                        
Each diel roll, and its actions, apply to all players for that turn.
 Day Actions (Blazing Sun) 
                            If enemies are in your territory, choose to attack or retreat. See
                            Attack, Defense, Retreat, and Healing as well as
                            Maps (The Kipukas): Claiming Territories: Contention
 
                            Once you have resolved contention, if any, in your territory you may take initiative.
                            Remember, you forego your ability to take any more actions for this day by taking initiative.
                            Be prepared for whatever your opponent might throw at you!
                         
                            After addressing contention, the player with initiative may place one card into play. Cards available for play during day 
                            are terrain features, traps, and souls in revealed or unrevealed position on a
                            territory you control. See Card Variations.
                         
                            The player with initiative may also reveal anor move 1 soul to adjacent spaces within their movement range. 
                            See Maps (The Kipukas): Movement


                                    Upon movement into a territory where your opponent has
                                    unrevealed cards, your opponent will have you roll a D20 for trap
                                    activation/detection. If one of these cards becomes activated, deal with the
                                    consequences. See
                                    Card Activation Sequence
                                    and Trap Cards.
                                

                                    If the movement or territory stand that you moved onto is occupied,
                                    then attack the soul(s) in that space. See
                                    Attack, Defense, Retreat, and Healing


                                    If the space occupied is a territory stand, and it is not under
                                    contention, place or replace a base camp token on the territory.
                                    See Maps (The Kipukas): Claiming Territories.
                                

 
                                    Upon movement into a territory where your opponent has
                                    unrevealed cards, your opponent will have you roll a D20 for trap
                                    activation/detection. If one of these cards becomes activated, deal with the
                                    consequences. See
                                    Card Activation Sequence
                                    and Trap Cards.
                                 
                                    If the movement or territory stand that you moved onto is occupied,
                                    then attack the soul(s) in that space. See
                                    Attack, Defense, Retreat, and Healing
 
                                    If the space occupied is a territory stand, and it is not under
                                    contention, place or replace a base camp token on the territory.
                                    See Maps (The Kipukas): Claiming Territories.
                                 Day Actions cont. After any new contention is resolved (i.e. keal means bout was won or put on pause due to loss) play moves to the other player. Now they resolve
                            any existing conflicts (choosing to fight or retreat), then optionally play a card, then optionally move a card and resolve any resulting contention.
                         
                            This continues between players until one player decides they have no moves left. 
                            At this point they can call for initiative, taking the initiative token on the timing of step 2.
                            At this point the other player makes as many moves as they want moving souls within their movement 
                            limits, playing cards from their hand, creating contention, and taking territories.
                         Once both players have exhausted the moves they want to make, either player may roll for the next diel cycle. Night Actions (Cresent Moon) 
                        Like day, initiative applies to night. Each player can take one of the following actions before
                        the other player takes an action. Each player may only perform each action once per night, but can choose the order the actions are taken
                     
                            If you so desire, you can move your hand to the bottom of the deck.
                         
                            You may draw cards to fill your hand back to 3 cards if your hand is diminished.
                         
                            You may choose to craft any items, then play or hide them.
                            See Item Cards: Crafting.
                         
                            You may play a sabotage card. See Sabotage cards.
                         
                            You may take initiative for the next diel cycle
                         Once both players have exhausted the moves they want to make, either player may roll for the next diel cycle. Storm Actions (Lightning / Wind) 
                        Take Shelter! If a storm is rolled, any card caught in it (not within a
                        capital or base camp) will take KEAL means damage and any downed cards
                        will be removed from play. See
                        KEAL Means Damage, Healing, and Tolerance.
                        Storm rolls apply to both players at the same time. 
                        Initiative does not apply to storm rolls. It carries over from the previous day/night to the next day/night.  Once both players have applied damaged to all applicable souls,
                        either player may roll for the next diel cycle.
                     Card Variations Used in Game Play 
                        In Kipukas there are several types of cards that compose a deck which are
                        listed below. Each variation has a section in these rules to describe their role in the game. Click or scan the QR codes
                        to see a representative member of each card type. Every card, regardless of type specifies
                        what variation it is (Card Variation), how it modifies game play (Game Effects), a class associated
                        with the number of cards that were produced (Scarcity), and a flavourful anecdote blending the card into the world (History).
                     Take and defend territories. a.k.a. soul cards Modify play within a territory Act as passive defenses Interfear with your opponent at night Build or bolster cards Grant players an effect for the duration of the game Allele 
                        These are the slight variations between cards. Some variations are planned,
                        while others are spontaneous. These may include changes in presentation,
                        play characteristics, etc.
                     What modifies a roll? Card Activation Sequence When souls move onto a movement or territory stand in a territory controlled
                    by their opponent a series of events might occur. If your opponent has any unrevealed cards
                    you must roll a D20 for activation and detection. See Trap Cards. 
                    The order in which card effects are applied follows:
                 Trap card activation/detection roll Terrain feature card Revealed entities Unrevealed entities Character and Species (Collectively Soul) Cards 
                        These cards are the soul of Kipukas. Species cards tell the story of a species
                        as a whole, while characters tell the story of an individual within a species.
                        Until tameability is fully implemented, no playable differences between
                        character and species cards exist. Throughout this guide, we refer to these as
                        souls or soul cards when the context applies to both characters and species.
                        Most souls have the ability to move and interact with traps and items, unless
                        otherwise stated. Each soul has an Archetypal Gene and 1 or more KEAL means made up of Archetypal Adaptations.
                        Additionally, each soul specifies how many movement/territory stands it can traverse in a day (Movement Range), 
                        a damage tracker for KEAL means and Final Blows (Card Status), additional play rules (Game Effects),
                        which dice it rolls for attack and defense (Die Rolls), prefered territory type (Habitat), and a tie breaking sequence (Brawl Power).
                        
                        We encourage you to develop story lines for your favorite cards to make the
                        game more imaginative and personal. These should be pliable details developed
                        through situational game play in order to form the soul's personality. Additionally,
                        if some detail of game strategy, like increasing the power of a dragon with a stick, seems
                        janky, you can call out the move as ridiculous even if the move is otherwise valid.
                        If you learn by example better than explanation, read  the Contention Resolution Example
                        in Attack, Defense, Retreat and Healing  first then reference this section as needed.
                        As interest grows, I plan on publishing play-through videos to kipukas.cards.
                     Archetypal Adaptations Overview Typing for KEAL means and Archetypal Gene KEAL Means 
                        Each card has a unique set of qualities used in attack and defense called
                        KEAL means. These must be injured or broken to defeat the card. See
                        Attack, Defense, Retreat, and Healing. Each part is composed of a material with
                        archetypal qualities and is influenced by the habitat of the card. By the way,
                        KEAL stands for Keep Everyone ALive and emphasizes the importance
                        of every card you play.
                     Archetypal Material 
                        KEAL means represent some physical trait or object that helps represent
                        the soul it belongs to. These are all made of some manner of matter or
                        energy, and can be thought of as materials. These materials share the same
                        archetypal adaptations presented by the Archetypal Adaptations Overview
                        which are also used for the card's Archetypal Gene. The major difference
                        between these qualities is that an Archetypal Gene represents its general adaptation, where KEAL
                        means detail the card's individual preferences/traits. Where each card only
                        has one archetypal adaptation representing its Archetypal Gene, each KEAL means may be
                        represented by 3 archetypal adaptations. These bonuses stack and counteract each
                        other, where each archetypal adaptation of the attacking KEAL means
                        interacts with each adaptation of the defending KEAL means.
                        Use the fists tool in the tool bar on kipukas.cards to determine the 
                        roll modifier between KEAL means for a given attack.
                 Habitat 
                        Whether by God or by man, this is where the soul was created to live. Group effects might be applied based
                        on habitat. Bonuses are applied to KEAL means bouts. See the next page for
                        habitat types and effects. Also see Maps (The Kipukas): Geography.
                     Habitat Effects Archetypal Gene (Final Blows) 
                        This is the predominate structure of the soul. After inflicting the necessary
                        number of injuries on the card, you must best the card in a crushing final
                        attack. This pits the inner-self of each soul against one another. Each soul
                        possesses a core archetypal adaptation and a motivation which effects the roll of a
                        Final Blow attack. Group effects, from a personal effect for example,
                        might be applied based on the soul.
                     Motivation (Final Blows) 
                        This is the other type considered for the Final Blow attack. Motivation reflects
                        the soul's purpose and drive. Motivation is broken into several groups, the
                        first three show what the soul will fight to preserve and have bonuses as
                        follows:
                     Motivation Anagram 
                        This shows the bonuses on the previous page overlayed on the additional attack bonus which motivation provides.
                        If there is an interaction between the motive types it add an additional 10 to the attack roll in the direction
                        of the arrow. For example, if a soul card with the worldly Service motivation attacks a soul card with the worldly
                        Satisfaction motivation it gains 10 to its original attack roll. Likewise if the Spectral Possessor motivation
                        attacks the Spectral Conscience motive it gains 10 for its attack. Worldly and Spectral motives do not interact. 
                     Fists Tool 
                        Use the fists tool on kipukas.cards to determine the typing match-ups for KEAL means and Archetypal Gene.
                        It can be accessed on the side tool bar on the home page or on any card page.
                     Tameability 
α mechanic that applies only to species cards. Some species are easy to
                        work with while others are quite persnickety. The tameability scale represents
                        this phenomenon. Other souls and equipment may need to be played in order
                        to wrangle these species. ∞ means the species is untameable (no amount of
                        bonuses will tame them), those with 10 are the most difficult to tame,
                        while 0 means the species does not require taming.
                        A species becomes tame once player affinity and card effects stack equally with
                        the species tameability. At this point, the soul will be under the full control of the player. If the player
                        chooses to play the creature untamed or the opponent reduces your control of
                        the creature below its tameability then the creature becomes under its own
                        influence, rouge. Additionally, some cards will specify
                        an ability to be played at a lower tameability rating without going rouge.
                        In exchange, certain KEAL means or play effects will be unavaliable.
                        These can be made avaliable by staking effects equal to the tameability
                        after the species enters play.
                 Rouge Species 
                        Each day, before either player's turn, you must roll for the rouge species'
                        movement. Assign the paths connected to its current movement/territory stand, numbers 1-6.
                        Roll a D6, then move the species along the appropriate path. Repeat until it has moved its entire Movement Range.
                        Movement is the responsibility of the of the person whom originally played the rouge.
                        If the territory it moves into is occupied by souls you or your
                        frenemy controls, it must attack all souls (for both players) in the territory until it looses once. Rouges
                        can move into and attack souls within either players capital.

                        Players engage in contention actions (attack, retreat, or reinforce) against rouges like 
                        they do against their opponent. You can also enter an agreement with your opponent to attack rouges
                        in a certain order anor obstain from attacking each other until the rouge is defeated.
                        Trading cards in hand is acceptable for these negotiations (You hand cannot have more than 3 cards, no exceptions!)
                        Dishonesty in these agreements is entirely possible, so be careful. Souls on the top of the card stack will be attacked first.

                        If a rouge defeats all soul cards in the
                        territory, remove the claim token on the territory. Rouge species must roll
                        against trap and terrain feature cards when applicable, then reap
                        consequences as well as benefits. Rouges must be revealed. Failure to
                        do so will result in an immediate victory for the opposite player. If a rouge
                        manages to defeat a player by defeating all souls in their capital while they control no base camps,
                        the other player must defeat or tame the rouge soul. Failure to do so will result in a dual defeat.
                     Taming Rouge Species 
                        Either player can attempt to tame a rouge soul and bring it under their
                        control. This will require boosting player affinity higher than the tameability
                        of the species card using items and the player’s base affinity level. This is the same
                        manner that species which require taming are placed normally. Taming will occur
                        at the begining of the day before contention is resolved. It is first avaliable to the
                        player with initiative. The player who attempts taming must have a fully controlled soul
                        already in the same territory as the rouge soul.
                     Imprisoned Souls 
                        In certain circumstances, i.e. loitering (more than 1 day) in your opponent's capital, and under the effect of certain
                        cards, souls can be taken prisoner. In this state the souls resides in the basecamp/capital in the territory where the prison is located
                        and is unable to be played by the card's owner. Territories can support a max of 3 prisoners. This is in addition to the 3 souls per player normally supported.
                        It will remain in the imprisoned state until it is liberated by meeting the conditions
                        listed on the prison play effect or (if unspecified) the basecamp/capital is taken from the opponent. And yes, that means your loitering
                        soul will likely be imprisoned in the capital for the entire game. However, some cards will have play mechanics that allow for imprisoned
                        souls to be sprung.
                     Affinity and Loyalty 
                        The ultimate goal of affinity is to be a long term game play strategy alongside
                        loyalties attached to the soul cards. When we attach a game server to the Kipukas binder
                        , you will be able to track your affinity for playing with 
                        Archeptypal Adaptations. As you declare them at
                        the start of a game, your affinity for them will grow. 
                        Likewise, loyalty will increase a with the number of times
                        that you play the specific card soul card. (Both will be limited to once per day, except at
                        tournaments, which will be once per match.) Loyalty will also increase if you
                        came to own the card through an incubation card. When loyalty, affinity, and play
                        effect bonuses stack greater than the species card's tameability, the
                        card will be tamed. Until our webapp is further developed, there will not be a
                        loyalty or affinity tracker. In its place, players will add 1 to attack and defense rolls
                        made for their declaired Archetypal Affinity.
                     Attack, Defense, Retreat, and Healing Defeating a Soul 
                        In order to defeat a soul, you must first weaken them by injuring or breaking
                        their KEAL means. This is accomplished by attacking with your soul’s
                        KEAL means. Each soul has a certain KEAL means tolerance that it
                        can take before becoming vulnerable to a Final Blow.
                        Modifiers are applied based on the KEAL means being used.
                        See Character and Species (Soul): KEAL Means.
                        After an unsuccessful blow, the player loses their ability to
                        attack with that card for this diel cycle. On the defender's next turn, they
                        must choose to attack or retreat. If an effect says souls take X damage, then
                        the damage will apply to either the KEAL means or the Final Blow. If it
                        applies to the Final Blow, the card becomes wasted and is discarded
                        without a Final Blow.
                     KEAL Means Damage, Healing, and Tolerance 
                        As souls accrue injuries (lose KEAL means), their tolerance for new injuries
                        becomes smaller. Injuries usually occur one at a time, but some can inflict
                        multiple at once. See below for an example. Some can even defeat souls
                        without contest under the correct conditions. Injuries should be noted on the
                        KEAL Means Damage Tracker on the card's page on kipukas.cards. When any card's
                        KEAL means count reaches the last number, they become downed. This means they can't
                        take any more punishment and become vulnerable to being engaged in a final
                        attack. If the card either survives a Final Blow or is not engaged in a final
                        attack, it won't be able to engage in attacks. As well, its movement speed is
                        halved until it is healed. See Maps (The Kipuka): Movement: Moving Downed Souls.
                        If a soul is caught exposed during a storm they will lose one KEAL
                        means or if they are downed they will be wasted.
                        
                        Souls can be healed by other souls, terrain features, or items with a healing
                        ability. The soul must be within the same territory as the healing entity or within its specified
                        healing range. Healers can only heal a certain number of KEAL means with
                        in a certain number of diel cycles. Most healers have the ability to heal
                        themselves under the same conditions mentioned above, unless they are
                        downed.
                     KEAL means tracker on kipukas.cards Toolbar option to reset the KEAL state of the cards (use after your game is complete) Methods of Attack Against KEAL Means 
                            The default will be dice based attacking. The attacking die (dice) will be
                            determined by the attacking card. Archetypal Material and Habitat bonuses may
                            apply. Check the typing tools and guides for applicable bonuses.
                         
                            Some cards will support mini-games where appropriate, i.e. a thief
                            themed card may involve a timed lock picking competition.
                         Methods of Defense Against KEAL Means 
                            The default will be dice based defending. The defending die type will be
                            determined by the defending card. Archetypal Material and Habitat bonuses may
                            apply. Check the typing guides for applicable bonuses.
                         
                            When defending against mini-games there are a few options
                            

                                    Beat them at their own game
                                

                                    Attack them before they can attack you
                                

                                    Engage them with terrain features, traps, and items to defeat them
                                    without playing the mini-game
                                

 
                                    Beat them at their own game
                                 
                                    Attack them before they can attack you
                                 
                                    Engage them with terrain features, traps, and items to defeat them
                                    without playing the mini-game
                                 Final Blow 
                        Once a soul’s KEAL means count is maxed, it may be engaged in a final
                        attack. This must be won in order to waste the soul under attack. This
                        attack uses the same dice as the cards use for KEAL means, but compares the cards' 
                        Archetypal Gene rather than a chosen KEAL means. Additionally, each cards' fundamental
                        motivation may help them conquer or live to see a new day. If the attack is
                        lost, then the attack against the downed soul comes to a close. If the attack is won, the defender is
                        wasted. See Discarding Cards and Deck Runout.
                     Brawl in the Event of a Tie 
                        If an attack results in a tie (the values of the attack and defense dice rolls,
                        after modifiers are applied, are equal) or the mini-game does not result in a clear winner,
                        the souls will engage in a brawl. In order to complete a brawl,
                        both players need to look at their soul's 4 digit brawl sequence. The brawl
                        sequence consists of letters, numbers, dashes, and underscores. In order to
                        determine the victor, players compare the characters from left to right
                        according to the table:
                     
                        This applies to all tied rolls involving cards in contention, namely KEAL means and final rolls.
                        By the way, brawl sequence are generated for every card at random. So an otherwise strong card can
                        have a very weak brawl and weak cards can brawl hard.
                     Retreat and Reinforce 
                        If you are in a badly losing fight, retreating might prove beneficial. It can allow
                        you to regroup and redeploy to a more favorable position while minimizing loss. Players may retreat souls
                        individually or as a group to a movement/territory stand(s) after their opponent's attack is stopped or after a soul is wasted, but before
                        launching a counterattack.  The stand must be within the max Movement Range of the slowest card in the group.
                        For example, if you are retreating 2 cards in a group, one with a Movement Range of 3 and the other with a Movement Range of 1,
                        you can only retreat both cards to a distance of 1 away for a group retreat. Once you state where you are retreating to,
                        the opposing player decides if they let you go, or they challenge the escape. If the opposing player wishes to
                        prevent the escape, the escapee must win a roll of 2 D6 against a D20
                        for the retreating party. If retreating souls individually, you roll for the success of each retreat in the same manner. Also, your opponent
                        might challenge any number of retreats they wish or let some souls go without challenging the retreat. 
                        If successful, move your party to the nearest base camp or
                        movement stand in territory that you control. Partial retreats are allowed.
                        Downed souls may only retreat under escort of a soul with 1 or more KEAL means. For the retreat,
                        they move at the max movement of the escort. Afterwards, they move at the speed of the downed soul.
                        See Moving Downed Souls. If unsuccessful, the retreating soul(s) 
                        forgo their ability to attack for the day.
                     Retreat and Reinforce 
                        Additionally, if the situation is looking grim, but you don't want to lose the fight you
                        can move souls into the conflict. This can occur in two ways. The first requires moving souls
                        from nearby uncontended territory. This occurs with the same timing as a retreat (after
                        an attack or after a wasted soul, but before counter attack) except the they are allowed
                        join the mess without rolling to enter. Additionally, if two territories are under contention
                        near one another you can retreat a soul or group from one conflict to another by executing a successful
                        retreat roll then moving the soul or party of souls into the other contended area.
                     Contention Resolution Example This is our old friend hilbert! Let’s pit him against one of the myrthvither raven species members Scenario Walkthrough Territory and Habitat 
                        This bout is taking place in territory 7 (hightlighted with pink) which, as indicated by the log
                        cabin, is a forest territory
                     Scenario Walkthrough Card Mechanics Overview Defending Card Hilbert: King of Avian Frogs Attacking Card Myrthvither Raven Scenario Walkthrough Combat Setup 
                        In the above examples, we have our character, Hilbert, locked in battle with
                        a species card called the Myrthvither Raven. The
                        defending card's (Hilbert) archetypal adaptation matches the player's declared affinity,
                        so the card receives a bonus to all rolls made by the card. The first attack
                        launched will be a KEAL means attack. The habitat of this card is forest
                        and the battle, according to the geography, is taking place in a forest. This
                        gives the defender a bonus to each KEAL attack made in this territory.
                        Unfortunately, the defender is a nomad, which neutralizes this bonus.
                        Don't worry we will get back at the opponent.
                        In this case, neither cards habitat's secondary effect kicks in.
                        Next, each player chooses a KEAL means and writes it on their grease
                        board. On the count of three, players reveal their choice to one another at the same time.
                        These will be the keal means used for the remainder of this contention.
                        
                     Scenario Walkthrough Defense 
                        Hilbert will use his Majestic Beak to defend against the Raven's Symbiont Barrage.
                        Each KEAL means is chosen by the cards owner, and lasts for all combat between these
                        souls on this day. The bonus will need to be determined using the fists tool on kipukas.cards
                        anor using the provided typing table guide if you perfer an arduous manual check.
                        A key thing to note is that each type has a different effect on the other type's
                        attack power. This adds or subtracts up to three points from the roll PER TYPE INTERACTION. This can really influence
                        the result of the bout. As an extreme example, if a Cenozoic-Decrepit-Angelic KEAL means is pitted against a Decript-Angelic-Brutal
                        KEAL means it will recieve a crushing -13 to its roll. If it only rolls 2 D6 (quite common for cards with effects) it is an instant loss.
                        However, in Hilbert's case the attack die modifier decreases the raven's attack roll by 5. If
                        the attack wins (which it has a miserable chance of acomplishing), the defender’s (Hilbert) KEAL
                        means count is reduced by one and the attacker has the opportunity to push
                        on and attack again. This continues until the attacker loses, chooses to stop
                        the attack, or the defenders KEAL means count drops to 0. Hilbert rolls with 2 D6 dice
                        where as the Myrthvither Raven rolls with only 1 D6. This coupled with the type
                        advantage of Hilbert's KEAL means ensures his victory in this defense. So,
                        the turn ends for the attacker.
                     Scenario Walkthrough Retreat, Reinforce, or Counter Attack 
                        Now Hilbert has several options. If he is worried about the raven recieving reinforcements
                        he can opt to retreat by winning a dice throw. Additionally,
                        if Hilbert has friendly souls nearby now would be the time they join in on the fun and reinforce Hilbert's attack.
                        See Retreat and Reinforcement.
                        However Hilbert is feeling his kingly confidence and thinking about all the loving he will recieve as a war hero,
                        so he is going to attack the Myrthvither Raven alone. Normally, this would involve the reverse
                        role of the previous scenario, but the Myrthvither Raven is special. It modifies how the opponent
                        can engauge it at the expense having 0 KEAL means. This means if it losses once, it is wasted.
                        In order to face the Myrthvither, Hilbert must successfully roll the standard trap detection to find
                        the raven. Assuming this is successful the raven will likely be defeaded due to being weak compared
                        to the almighty King Hilbert. The raven is a mear scout in the prescence of greatness after all. If, by some
                        miracle of play and strategy the Myrthvither Raven actually manages to beat Hilbert's roll, the current territory
                        will remain under contention, but the fighting will resume the next day with the player who claims initiative attacking first.
                        Alternatively, either Hilbert or the raven can be attacked by a reinforcing soul moved into the territory during this day.
                     Scenario Walkthrough Clutching Victory 
                        Here we could easily assume the raven was wasted on Hilbert's counter offensive. However;
                        let's pretend that the Myrthvither Raven is now equipted with some item that gives it one additional
                        KEAL means to lose. This would mean that it is now downed and vulnerable to the Final Blow.
                        Now Hilbert engages in the Final Blow. Given that both cards have the Avian archetypal adaptation
                        neither is at a disadvantage since adaptations of the same type usualy do not interact.
                        Additionally, neither motive has an advantage against the other. However; the Myrthvither Raven is in the
                        Support preservation triad motivation which would give it a bonus of 3 to it's
                        final defense roll. Hilbert's motivation is in the Self preservation triad, which turns all his final blows engagements, including this one,
                        to best 2 out of 3. So Additionally, Passion and Satisfaction do not interact, Hilbert does not recieve the +10 bonus.
                        If the Final Blow is successful (in this case twice in 3 rolls), (which is likely given the relative power of each) then
                        the defender normally gets wasted and moves out of play. See Discarding Cards and Deck Runout.
                        If at any point the sum of the rolls and bonuses were tied, the battle
                        match would end with a brawl. Let's assume the raven recieves it's final miracle and ties
                        with Hilbert thereby starting a brawl. When we compare the value of Hilbert's HMPU, to the Myrthvither Raven's ZrrD.
                        we see that Hilbert triumps with a capital H over a capital Z. The battle is won, now Hilbert can return to his kingly 
                        diggs and reap the spoils of his victory! (or the game will contiune on, just don't tell him that!)
                     Terrain Features 
                        These cards modify territory either to benefit or hinder souls in the area.
                        Some may be placed at random anywhere on the board, while others may
                        offer controlled placement. These may target your opponent's territory claims,
                        your territory claims, unclaimed territories, or any territory regardless of
                        status. Only one terrain feature can be in play on a territory at a time.
                        Unless otherwise specified, a new terrain feature played in a territory will
                        replace the terrain feature card currently in play on the territory. Some of
                        these cards must be revealed because their effects are instant and continuous.
                        Unless stated otherwise, most terrain features are revealed at the discretion of
                        the claim owner. If a territory is claimed with an unrevealed terrain feature,
                        it becomes revealed to the new owner. These cannot be moved by a
                        soul.
                     Random Territory Selection 
                        Some cards apply an effect to a territory via a method of random selection. In
                        order to properly select this territory, roll a D20 (or a D12 if you own any). If
                        the number rolled is within the highest number on the board, then apply the
                        effect to that territory. Otherwise, re-roll until the roll is less than or equal to
                        the highest territory number. Alternatively, a random number generator is a
                        good fit here. There are a bunch of free ones that you can use if you prefer
                     Trap Cards Sabotage Cards 
                    Play these cards under the cover of night and mess with your opponent's next
                    turn. Sabotage card effects can target a wide variety of play aspects, from
                    temporarily disabling mechanical souls to blowing up terrain features.
                    Sabotage cards can only be played once a night. Their effects are usually
                    applied to the next day roll; however, cards can change this if specified.
                    Unlike most other cards in Kipukas, the effects of sabotage cards tend to be
                    fixable under specific conditions or after a certain number of turns. Also,
                    sabotage cards have a higher likelihood of success when compared to traps.
                    Unlike traps; however, sabotage cards have consequences for the player who
                    attempted the sabotage if they fail. This can be anything from jailing souls for
                    a number of turns to wasting the soul who attempted to plant the explosive.
                    As such, these cards have three aspects important to game play: Success
                    Criteria, Successful Sabotage Result, and Failure Consequence. Typically,
                    sabotage cards will state rolling a D20 against two D6 as the activation
                    criteria.
                 Item Cards 
                        These cards are used in crafting. Crafting provides potions, equipment, and
                        other boosters. A single item will have far less power (or no power) than a
                        crafted item. The more items used in a craft, the more powerful
                        the final crafted item will be. Unless otherwise stated, items can be moved
                        unrevealed by souls. Generally, if an effect or attack with an equipped item
                        fails, you may try that effect or attack again during the next diel cycle. If a
                        crafted item emulates another card type (i.e. trap card, soul card, etc.) please
                        review the respective section on how to play the recipe. Items and crafted items
                        are generally not destroyed, but rather dropped when a soul equipped with them is
                        wasted. If a territory is under contention when this happens, each
                        player chooses a suitable card to attempt to grab the item. A KEAL means
                        bout will ensue where the victor equips the item and the loser takes KEAL
                        means damage. See Attack, Defense, Retreat, and Healing.
                        If only one player has a suitable soul(s), the opponent can only defend the
                        dropped item, not equip it. If neither player has a suitable soul in the
                        territory, the dropped item is ignored until a suitable soul move into the
                        conflict or the contention is resolved.
                     Crafting 
                        Crafting occurs at night, when a player combines two to three item cards according to a
                        recipe. If a crafting recipe is being guessed (competitors
                        and refs can tell you if you are correct) and the guess is wrong, then
                        immediatly discard the items involved in the guess. Once an item is crafted, you can keep the cards together to
                        represent that item, or if you prefer, you can submit the recipe to Kipukas
                        then purchase a single card representation of the crafted item when available.
                        
                        Crafted items may enhance cards from other categories or produce cards from
                        other categories. Once applied to a card, an enhancement can be moved or
                        removed, unless otherwise specified. Crafting character cards is the only way to
                        have more than a single copy of a character in your deck, but you can only
                        have one natural character card and one crafted character card. There will be no
                        exceptions to this rule. Once an item is crafted, it either needs to be used
                        according to the recipe's description or hidden on a controlled territory (max
                        1 per territory). To use hidden items, you simply pull the item from the
                        territory and craft as normal. If a territory is taken which contains hidden
                        items, the items must be revealed unless protected by a different active card.
                        Control of the revealed cards, while in play, is given to the new claim holder.
                        The claim holder must then decide to use, hide the items again, or discard the
                        items to the card owner's discard.
                     Equip Items to Souls 
                        Items are often able to equip to a soul to increase some aspect of the card's
                        abilities. Items are equipped the night they are crafted or during the day
                        as a part of the movement phase. Equipped items may transfer between souls if
                        they occupy the same territory/movement stand. Equipped
                        items are allowed to be unequipped. If a player decides to do this, the item (crafted or not)
                        stays revealed in the territory which they were unequipped. Unlike hidden items, there is no limit to the number
                        of revealed unequipped items in a territory. If a crafted item is unequipped, the item remains in its crafted state and
                        the cards remain together in a stack. A reasonable soul under the control of either player
                        may pick up and equip these items provided they are in the uncontested territory. When crafted or uncrafted
                        items are equiped to a soul, move all cards together as a stack
                     Recipes 
                        Crafting recipes must be discovered and kept for reference later. In
                        competition, recipes maybe guessed and confirmed by event refs or
                        competitors. If confirmed, you may use the recipe in the match. Only one
                        recipe can be used in this fashion. Normally, you present the recipe from your
                        recipe deck to the other player to prove you can play the item combo. 
                        
                        During our founders period, we have released all recipe combinations that are
                        possible to make with the founder's deck items. Additionally, we have made a page
                        on kipukas.cards to demonstrate how this mechanic works. You can find it under the
                        menu in the tool bar. In the future, we plan on making these into recipe cards as well
                        for players to incorperate into their broader recipe deck. However, these recipes will
                        always be accepted a competitions as open use and the online demonstration will always
                        reside on the kipukas binder.
                     Personal Effect Cards 
                    These cards are played at the beginning of the game and cannot be changed.
                    They add an ability for the player to use throughout the game. If no player
                    effect card is owned or the player prefers, then they can use the default effect as follows:
                    
Place any card from the deck in front of the player. Play it in 5 diel cycles.
 Play Effect Examples Increase player affinity for an archetypal adaptation Immediate crafting of recipes that would otherwise require a special soul to be in play Decreased frenemy effects Search your deck and draw any card of a given type, either at the start
                        of the game or after so many diel cycles Stealing Cards 
                    We don't condone stealing another player's card out of game. However, if you
                    would consider such a thing, I doubt you care what we think. Despite this, we
                    are more than happy to encourage stealing in game! Cards will tell you to
                    steal either from your opponent's hand, deck or either. You might be able to
                    steal the cards revealed or unrevealed, depending on the instruction of the
                    card. Either way, you begin by declaring whether you will steal from your
                    opponent's hand or deck. Then your opponent will fan out the cards you have
                    chosen, either facing them (unrevealed) or you (revealed). Then you pick the
                    card that you fancy and place it in your hand. If the card allows for stealing
                    revealed, you CANNOT scan the opponent's cards to make your decision in
                    competitive play. For friendly play, handle that as you like. Most
                    IMPORTANT, you CANNOT gain more than 3 cards in your hand from
                    stealing. This is completely forbidden in Kipukas. If your stealing move would
                    result in you taking more than 3 cards it is cancled and in compatition discarded. 
                    It should go without saying that stolen cards return to their original owners at the end
                    of the game. The other options are gambling or actual thievery, in either case
                    you should consult your local laws on the legality of your behavior.
                 Discarding Cards and Deck Runout 
                    Once a card becomes wasted, it is discarded into a pile and cannot be played
                    again. However, some card effects target the cards in either player's discard enabling their reemergence. If you run
                    out of cards before the end of the game, don't worry, you have not lost yet.
                    You may continue using the cards you have in play on the kipuka. If both
                    players run out of cards, either may still manage to take all the remaining
                    territory even without cards in hand. Here they would win under standard
                    conditions. Otherwise, play until no characters or species 
                    (including rouge species) are left on the kipuka. At this point, the players stop contention
                    under a forced peace and hold convention. Here they discuss how to proceed
                 
Keep the peace:
                        Allow the player with
                        more territories to win. If an equal number of territories is possessed,
                        the game is a tie. (Good for a shorter game)
                     
Call the reserves:
                        Both players choose whether to reuse the deck they just fought with or change
                        to another deck. If changing decks, the second deck must be pre-built, conformant
                        and ready to play. The player who had the last soul on the kipuka states whether they
                        will keep or use a new deck first.
                     
                    It is worth while to note that if both parties are in total agreement to keep the peace
                    this it is fully acceptable at compatitions.
                    If an agreement can't be reached within a few minutes, just rage-quit, because
                    the other person must be pretty insufferable. Why were you playing a game
                    with them in the first place?
                 Card Placement All cards played throughout the game will dictate how and where they can be placed. Placement Options Player controlled territory Opponent controlled territory Territory boarding player controlled territory Territory boarding opponent controlled territory Territory without claim Any territory at random Placement Etiquette Play an unrevealed card vertically face down on the mat Play a revealed card vertically face up on the mat Play a revealed landscape card horizontally, but vertically when unrevealed or hidden Play a hidden card vertically face down under the mat Building Decks 
                        Decks are built gradually in Kipukas. To keep barriers to entry as low as
                        possible we offer a starter kit that includes a starter map (changes by season),
                        a starter deck or two of your choice (at first only the founder's deck is
                        available, but more archetypal adaptation specific starter decks will be
                        produced), and two sets of tokens. Growing your deck after you purchase a
                        starter kit (or if you are ambitious, before ever purchasing one) involves
                        purchasing other starter decks separately, purchasing individual cards from
                        kipukas.com, purchasing and waiting out the incubation period for incubation
                        cards, or trading with people that you trust. Kipukas cards are valuable
                        pieces of fine art, as such we take their trade and resell seriously. You can
                        request any sell or trade to be brokered through Kipukas. A brokered trade
                        will involve both parties sending their cards to Kipukas. Each card in the
                        trade will be authenticated using our 7 factor authentication process. If all
                        cards involved in the trade are presumed authentic, we will complete the trade
                        and send the cards to their new owners. If any cards are found to be
                        inauthentic the trade will be canceled, the authentic cards will be returned to
                        their owners and the inauthentic cards will be retained by Kipukas. This
                        process protects your information as neither party gets to know the other’s
                        address while protecting you from counterfeit cards. Kipukas will also put
                        cards that you want to trade, sell, or auction on our website and inform you
                        of offers as they are made. Keep watch for Kipukas Trade Deals, where we
                        offer an exceptional trade from time to time (frequency increases as customer
                        base builds). 
                        As for recipes, you can submit a request for the recipe card with your next
                        order. Recipes also act as information that players can trade. Standardly, one
                        recipe is given out with the purchase of three cards or three recipes with the
                        purchase of one starter pack. If a certain recipe is requested in the order
                        notes, it will replace one of the random recipes you would have received.
                     Incubation Cards Deck Sturcture Decks must have 30 cards + 1 optional Personal Effect No more. No less. Maps (The Kipukas) 
                        Maps are 3D representations of territory and control. Each map hosts stands
                        that represent traveling time and 8 to 12 territories that represent control.
                        Each territory can host a max of 3 souls. In each
                        territory there are stands for soul tokens and stands for base camp or capital
                        tokens. Soul tokens represent the position of a revealed soul, while square
                        base camps and capitals act as points of entry for new souls, a place for
                        revealed or unrevealed souls to stay, and represent control of a territory
                        Capitals act the same as base camps, but are particularly important to game
                        play because your opponent will not be able to take your capital until they
                        take all other territories on the board. Territories also represent opportunities
                        or dangers for souls which typically dwell in or avoid the geography. See
                        Character and Species (Soul) Cards: KEAL Means: Habitat and
                        Maps (The Kipukas): Geography. For
                        competition purposes, only Kipukas produced boards are allowed. We do encourage
                        adding adornments and personal flair to show off!
                     Movement 
                        Each territory contains slots for placing base camp tokens and soul tokens.
                        When a card enters the map it starts at one of the player controlled base
                        camps or their capital, either unrevealed or revealed, dependent on the
                        player's choice. Cards cannot be moved in the same day they were played
                        unless stated otherwise. As it becomes strategically advantageous, each player should choose to move their souls in
                        play. This can be done by following the lower lines which connect between the
                        circular movement stands and the square territory stands. Every territory hosts
                        a max of 3 souls (per player), and each soul has a finite number of spaces which it can
                        traverse. When a soul moves, the card is placed on the mat slot with the
                        same number as the territory moved into. In order to move, you must reveal
                        the soul unless the card says otherwise. If an enemy is on the same stand that you moved to, you must
                        engage an attack. Also, you cannot move past an enemy waiting on a
                        movement slot unless a card effect permits doing so. See Attack, Defense, Retreat, and Healing;
                        otherwise, read claiming territories below if you just moved
                        on to a territory stand. 
                        
                        If a revealed soul is in a base camp, then no soul token is used. If the
                        soul is currently on a movement stand, a soul token is used to represent this.
                        If more than one soul is on the same movement stand, stack the individual
                        tokens to represent the group. If you have two souls in the same territory on
                        different movement stands, flip a soul token over and declare which soul is
                        represented by that token. If your soul moves back into a base camp, then
                        keep the card revealed, but remove its soul token from the board. With the exception of being
                        totally destroyed, capitals cannot be taken until all other base camps are taken. However, your opponent's
                        souls can move though capitals without entering contention. If your opponent leaves a soul in your capital
                        for more than 1 day after arriving, the capital takes the soul prisoner. See Character and Species (Souls): Imprisoned Souls
 Transit Territories 
                        If a territory only contains movement stands it is a transit territory. This occurs due to the difficulties required
                        building within the territory, figuratively speaking. A good example is a
                        territory filled with water. See Maps (The Kipukas): Geography for
                        more information about water movement. These locations are clearly labeled
                        on the mat as 'transit territory', so cards moved within should be placed
                        accordingly.
                     Moving Downed Souls 
                        When souls lose a specified number of KEAL means bouts they become downed. Downed souls
                        need an escort when retreating. If their movement is low enough, they need an escort to move
                        at all after becoming downed. See below for the movement penalty to apply to downed souls:
                     Claiming Territories 
                        In order to win the game, you must first claim territories. To claim territories,
                        you must move at least one soul into the base camp of the territory you wish
                        to claim. If it is empty, congrats, you have a new base camp! Place a base
                        camp token on the square stand, then continue your turn. Otherwise, if the
                        territory has a claim on it, you must oust your opponent by defeating their
                        traps, terrain features, and souls before you can replace their claim with your
                        own. See  Contention next. There is no limit to the number of territories that
                        can be claimed in a single day. If you think you can take all territories,
                        including the opposing player's capital, in a single day, go for the win!
                     Contention 
                        If a frenemy's soul enters territory controlled by opposition (with the exception of the capital), the territory
                        comes into contention. Under contention, players must perform the card
                        activation sequence. See Card Activation.
                        Card effects often activate when you enter frenemy territory and are triggered by
                        a D20 roll, so always roll when entering contested territory. You will
                        need to contend with their traps and terrain features before attacking revealed
                        souls.
                        
                        In order to claim the territory, you must take the base camp by moving
                        a soul onto the territory stand and alleviate contention on that stand. If your opponent has any revealed souls in
                        the territory you moved into, all opposing souls will need to leave the territory
                        before contention on the whole territory is relieved. This means you will not be able to take possession
                        of the traps and terrain features in said territory until your opponent has no souls remaining in the territory,
                        even if you have taken the base camp. If your opponent has
                        multiple enemies on a stand, you can attack one or all (one at a time) of
                        the enemies on the stand. If you decide to stop your attack or if you lose an attack,
                        your opponent will either choose to counterattack, retreat or reinforce. If their
                        counterattack stops before all your souls are defeated, on the following day, you
                        have the option to continue the fight or retreat and move out of the space. You can also reinforce the conflict.
                        See Attack, Defense, Retreat, and Healing.
                        
                        If you are not successful in taking the territory, your opponent is not
                        obligated to reveal entities, traps, or terrain features unused in its defense.
                        Once your opponent has exhausted all of their defense options, and you move
                        a soul into the base camp, you should replace their base camp token with
                        your base camp token. At this point all terrain features and items must be
                        revealed then control of the cards, while they are in play, is transferred to the
                        victor. Traps still roll activation/detection for their original player; however,
                        if detected the new territory owner can take control of the trap instead of disabling it.
                        See Trap Cards.
                     Geography 
                        Each territory has a geography that corresponds to the map's topography.
                        This geography offers habitat effects for the soul cards in the territory.
                        See Character and Species (Soul) Cards: KEAL Means: Habitat.
                     
                        In addition to the boat(s) marking the water habitats, Kipukas maps use
                        docks to represent the points that souls can embark onto boats. 
                        Boats are played from the hand at docks. Boats can ferry a specified number of souls
                        a given distance over a day. Once launced they can make land and be embarked from the last spot they landed.
                        Either player may use a boat landed in an uncontended spot. Cards may attempt to
                        swim by rolling 2 D6. If you roll 2 + 2 the card has successfully swum. It no longer needs
                        to roll to continue swimming until it exists the water.
                        Attempting to swim does not cost movement, but can only be attempted once
                        per soul per day. You can attempt to swim by traversing any path leading to water.
                     Representation of Geography on the Kipuka Mountain Habitat: A-Frame House Geomarker Forest Habitat: Log Cabin Geomarker Plains Habitat: Ranch House Geomarker Volcanic Habitat:Modern House Geomarker Representation of Geography on the Kipuka Water Habitat: Boat Geomarker Underground Tunnel:Connect territories and shorten travel for underground dwellers
                             Water Habitat: Dock Geomarker (Point of Entry) Game Mats 
                    Mats connect a soul card's position with the soul token's position on the map.
                    This makes game play more comfortable by organizing the game space.
                    Kipukas will have a set of mats, but will encourage community development
                    and artist support with regard to producing more engaging and creative mats.
                    Make them as personal as you wish. The only production guidelines are as follows:
                    

The number of section slots must be greater than or equal to the number of territories.
Territory reference numbers must be included and visable both with and without cards.
A transit territory space must be allocated on the mat.
 
                    The standard mat size that Kipukas produces is 17" by 24". If you create a map design you feel really
                    represents a facet of Kipukas, you can submit your creations to us. If we like it, you have a good
                    we will consider producing it and providing a commission for the design.
                 The number of section slots must be greater than or equal to the number of territories. Territory reference numbers must be included and visable both with and without cards. A transit territory space must be allocated on the mat. Story Challenging Your Opponent 
                        There is a lot going on in this game. Along the way, we will make mechanics that conflict on a
                        reasonability level. My personal favorite example is a dragon wielding a stick
                        to boost its attack. That is all sorts of wrong. If your opponent attempts to
                        make a move that simply makes no sense, you have the right to contest
                        it. The following is how you do so:
                     Call them out before the effect is used in game play Pause the contention and hold convention (have a talk) One player must concede reasonability (either for or against) if required, enlist a tie breaking third individual to make the final call This Game is Hard! 
                        Yes, it is definitely a lot to learn at first. Kipukas is a game that rewards
                        repeated play with ease. The more you can play the game, the better you will
                        know the card mechanics of your deck, the turn structure, and the interactions between the
                        pieces. The overall plan is to progressively create tools to aid
                        players in keeping track of their game. Either way, we try our best to make
                        this rules set as comprehensive and digestible as possible. When possible, we
                        will post videos to clarify game play aspects and intent of the mechanics. In
                        all, don't worry about capturing every aspect of this game. As I stated, there
                        is a lot going on. Have fun with it, make house rules, and we are always open
                        to suggestions. These rules are geared for a future with competitions where
                        everything will be scrutinized. At this point, don't get too bogged down and
                        just find a way to play that is fun for you and your friends.
                     Play Style Options


                             /assets/thumbnails/x1/{{card.img_name}} 1x,
        /assets/thumbnails/x2/{{card.img_name}} 2x,
        /assets/thumbnails/x3/{{card.img_name}} 3x,
        /assets/thumbnails/x4/{{card.img_name}} 4x,
        /assets/thumbnails/x5/{{card.img_name}} 5x,

                /assets/thumbnails/x2/{{card.img_name}} 1x,
        /assets/thumbnails/x4/{{card.img_name}} 2x